---
title: Drake v0.35.0
released: YYYY-MM-DD
---

# Announcements

* TBD

# Breaking changes since v0.34.0

* TBD

# Changes since v0.34.0

## Dynamical Systems

<!-- <relnotes for systems go here> -->

* TBD [systems,math] Remove deprecated code 2021-10 ([#15834][_#15834])  # A few items (where the deprecation rework is more involved) are left untouched, to be addressed in a separate commit.
* TBD [systems] Move DeclareCacheEntry to protected access ([#15862][_#15862])  # Per announced deprecation.
* TBD [framework] Demote deprecated SystemScalarConverter::Add to internal ([#15863][_#15863])  # Upgrade some ASSERT to DEMAND; the codepaths are not inner-loop. Add missing docstring for IsConvertible.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Mathematical Program

<!-- <relnotes for solvers go here> -->

* TBD Add bindings for IbexSolver ([#15793][_#15793])
* TBD [solvers] Remove fast_qp and gurobi_qp ([#15817][_#15817])  # These files contain years-old functions that are not up to par with Drake's present-day standards for our library (e.g., they have no unit tests at all), and are entirely unused within Drake itself. These files were only available if Gurobi was enabled, so have never been part of Drake's modern binary releases.  It's possible that users building from source have been using these functions.  If so, those users should copy these files into their own project's source tree, and continue using them there.
* TBD [solvers,tools,geometry] [workspace] Upgrade scs to latest release 3.0.0 ([#15886][_#15886])  # This upgrade incorporates major changes from SCS. The solution tolerances have changed. If users find solutions to be too loose now, they can change the SCS settings to compensate: MathematicalProgram prog; prog.SetSolverOption(ScsSolver::id(), "eps_abs", 1E-6); prog.SetSolverOption(ScsSolver::id(), "eps_rel", 1E-6); This is a breaking change in that some ScsSolverDetails members have been added and removed. Co-authored-by: Hongkai Dai <daihongkai@gmail.com>

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Multibody Dynamics and Geometry

<!-- <relnotes for geometry,multibody go here> -->

* TBD [geometry] Deprecate geometry::FrameIndex ([#15778][_#15778])  # geometry::FrameIndex is another ancient relic in the SceneGraph ecosystem. It should not have been in the geometry:: namespace. At best, it should have been in geometry::internal. However, upon further inspection, it provides very little value. So, we're deprecating the type entirely.
* TBD URDF parsing makes greater use of one-time warnings ([#15783][_#15783])  # There are various attributes and tags that Drake unconditionally ignores in a URDF. Historically, many of these would dispatch a warning for every instance of tag/attribute, potentially flooding the output. This changes those warnings to be a one-time warning only. Any warning whose dispatch is conditional are left largely intact.
* TBD [geometry/optimization] CartesianProduct isa ConvexSet ([#15571][_#15571])  # This is a general concept from geometry, but in particular it adds support for parsing Cylinder geometry for SceneGraph.
* TBD Add Time Optimal Path Parameterization based on Reachability Analysis (TOPPRA) ([#15731][_#15731])  # This approach computes the time optimal path by solving a sequence of  small-sized LPs.
* TBD [geometry,systems] [geometry:meshcat] Add support for texture maps for obj files ([#15788][_#15788])  # Meshcat has two different message types for loading meshes.  Previously I had implemented only the "Mesh" data structure which includes all primitive geometry and "_meshfile_geometry", with only limited support for textures.  This PR adds support for the "_meshfile_object" data structure, with it's richer obj/texture support.
* TBD [geometry:meshcat] Resolve segfault on close for mac ([#15823][_#15823])  # Resolves #15821
* TBD [geometry,tools,examples] [geometry] Visualizing hydro with DrakeVisualizer ([#15772][_#15772])  # This streams the meshes for hydro geometries via a previously unused lcm mechanism. That mechanism requires a patch to drakevisualizer.py (it hasn't been kept up to date w.r.t. python versions). We also expand `rolling_sphere_run_dynamics` to include a flag to exercise this new functionality. To see the visualization at work, run: bazel run //examples/multibody/rolling_sphere:rolling_sphere_run_dynamics \ -- --vis_hydro
* TBD [geometry,multibody,solvers] Fix warnings from apple clang 13 ([#15838][_#15838])  # Relevant to: #15802
* TBD Work around Apple clang 13 optimizer ([#15840][_#15840])  # Relevant to: #15802 With -O2 optimization, the apple clang 13 optimizer damages the unrelated variable expected_outlier_label_. Use compiler attributes to disable optimization at one location.
* TBD [plant] Add publish_period option to LCM contact results ([#15848][_#15848])  # Fix a related ContactResultsToLcmSystem warning message to be correctly actionable.
* TBD [multibody] Promote MultibodyPlantConfig out of dev ([#15826][_#15826])  # Refactor MultibodyPlant to obtain its default constructor values from the Config struct in most cases.
* TBD Add additional constraints to Toppra ([#15799][_#15799])
* TBD [geometry,multibody] geometry/proximity: Remove name from MeshFieldLinear ([#15847][_#15847])  # Closes: #15616. Instead of having all users of MeshFieldLinear guess an appropriate name, defer the naming decision to the writing of a vtk file. The name was not used elsewhere in Drake, and no constraints were ever enforced on it. Newly deprecated are the name-accepting constructor, and the name accessor.
* TBD [multibody,geometry,examples] [geometry] Visualize at 32 Hz or 64 Hz by default ([#15850][_#15850])  # Using a period that does not have an exact representation in binary floating point (e.g., our current defaults of 1/30 or 1/60) can lead to undesirably small timesteps due to the dithering of update rates.
* TBD [geometry:meshcat] Adds visualization for Point Clouds ([#15851][_#15851])  # Includes a refactoring of the GeometryData msgpack type, because adding yet another geometry type was becoming unwieldy. Implements the TODO making many MaterialData fields optional, because the point clouds needed to not have spurious mesh material properties in their message.
* TBD MBP: add GetFrameIndices ([#15787][_#15787])
* TBD [geometry:meshcat] Adds SetAnimation ([#15876][_#15876])  # Provides a MeshcatAnimation class and Meshcat::SetAnimation. Includes an upgrade to my test script which prints more narrow diffs; this proved invaluable for debugging this complicated message type. Resolves #15800.
* TBD [geometry,multibody,examples] Removing VolumeVertex and SurfaceVertex ([#15903][_#15903])  # This replaces SurfaceVertex and VolumeVertex with Vector3. In some cases it leads to a code restructuring. Where code would iterate through the `VolumeVertex v` and then, inside the loop, create the *actual* loop variable `p_MV`, we've changed the for loop to simply iterate through `p_MV` directly. This touches all usages and removes the ubiquitous invocations of r_MV(); it is no longer necessary or valid, the vertex *is* its own position.
* TBD [multibody,tools] [workspace] Upgrade libsdformat to latest release 12.0.0 ([#15852][_#15852])  # * Improvements to the `<pose>` tag with the addition of the `//pose[@rotation_format]` attribute to choose between Euler RPY or Quaternions for the rotation component. Angles can now be expressed in degrees using the `//pose[@degrees = true]` attribute when using Euler RPY. * Add a new attribute `//include[@merge]` that allows including nested models without introducing new scopes (the contents of the included model are moved without any modification to the parent model). Note, however, that this currently does not support URDFs parsed through libsdformat's Interface API. * Remove previously deprecated element `//joint/axis/initial_position`.
* TBD Add heap-free variants of GetPositions(ModelIndex) and related methods ([#15900][_#15900])  # Added API variants that return results in an output parameter than through function return, to avoid heap allocation. Added unit tests to verify that no heap activity occurs.
* TBD [geometry,multibody] Remove SurfaceVertexIndex type ([#15912][_#15912])  # There are four index types associated with the two mesh types. This removes the first of the four indices. In this case "removal" means: 1. Removing all usages of SurfaceVertexIndex in Drake C++ code. 2. Removing the python bindings. 3. Keep the type, but change it to be an alias to an int. This will allow us to defer updating Anzu until *all* index types have been removed. At that point, we'll remove the int aliases and update Anzu. - TypeSafeIndex allows for index vs unsigned int comparisions. This alias will break this functionality. Where necessary, those signed- unsigned comparisons are also updated.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Tutorials and examples

<!-- <relnotes for examples,tutorials go here> -->

* TBD [examples,multibody] Clean up Drake-owned URDF files: remove non-spec tags and attributes ([#15783][_#15783])  # In the past, we've had various custom tags and attributes that Drake consumed. Some of them are no longer consumed. It includes: - collision@group - visual@group - collision/drake_compliance/* (now replaced by collision/drake:proximity_properties/* - joint/dynamics@coulomb_window Presence of some of the ancient tags cause warnings to get written to the console. There's no reason for these tags/attributes to be present in anything that Drake owns. Where the tags/attributes are simply dead, they've been removed. Where they've been replaced, the tags have been updated. This also updates the comments for two Atlas URDFs, removing the out-of-date warning that the files were generated from xacro files and should not be edited.
* TBD [acrobot] Remove spurious const ([#15812][_#15812])  # There is already a pydrake unit test for this, it's just that pybind11 always discards "const" qualifiers so we never noticed.
* TBD [atlas] Use a smaller time step to avoid discrete solver errors ([#15814][_#15814])  # The error happens at time ~0.5s, which is not caught by CI.  We can't run the full-length test in CI, because in Debug builds it takes well over two minutes.
* TBD tutorials: Fix camera + robot positioning; show depth rendering ([#15841][_#15841])  # Make separation between color and depth properties more explicit Add notes about scene-fixed camera Denote left and right iiwa Add TODO about awkward initialization events for setting up meshcat Defer construction of persistent Simulator
* TBD [examples,multibody] [examples] Always connect a SceneGraph for contact visualization ([#15849][_#15849])  # Otherwise, we spew console warnings about non-unique contact names. For that same reason, deprecate the ConnectContactResultsToDrakeVisualizer overloads that lack a scene_graph.
* TBD

## Miscellaneous features and fixes

<!-- <relnotes for common,math,lcm,lcmtypes,manipulation,perception go here> -->

* TBD [trajectories] Cleanup PiecewisePose and add python bindings ([#15786][_#15786])  # - Fix: PiecewisePose was not properly initializing its base class. - Updates the non-virtual public methods to be style-guide compliant (and deprecates the old names). - Adds python bindings.
* TBD [trajectories] more useful error messages for piecewise polynomial spline generation ([#15795][_#15795])
* TBD [common,math] Initialize the AutoDiffXd value field to NaN ([#15792][_#15792])  # .
* TBD [geometry] Enable hydro geometry vis in python, implement for python meshcat ([#15773][_#15773])  # Binds the methods maybe_get_hydroelastic_mesh(). The visualizer can now take a additional arguments that will determine if proximity geometries are visualized by the declared primitive or by any available hydroelastic mesh representation. It extends the arguments for parsing to include the control and modifies show_model to benefit from the new parameters. To see the effect: cd drake bazel build \ //tools:drake_visualizer @meshcat_python//:meshcat-server \ //manipulation/util:show_model In one terminal ./bazel-bin/external/meshcat_python/meshcat-server In the other terminal: ./bazel-bin/manipulation/util/show_model --meshcat default \ bindings/pydrake/multibody/test/hydroelastic.sdf \ --meshcat_role proximity Now you will see a smooth, yellow sphere. Then try:Now you will see a smooth, yellow sphere (the idealized sphere used as collision geometry). Then try: ./bazel-bin/manipulation/util/show_model --meshcat default \ bindings/pydrake/multibody/test/hydroelastic.sdf \ --meshcat_role proximity --meshcat_hydroelastic The smooth sphere will be replaced with a coarsely tesselated sphere. If you modify the value on line 57 of the sdf file from <drake:mesh_resolution_hint>0.2</drake:mesh_resolution_hint> to <drake:mesh_resolution_hint>0.4</drake:mesh_resolution_hint> the sphere becomes an octahedron. Modify it to <drake:mesh_resolution_hint>0.1</drake:mesh_resolution_hint> and it becomes smoother.
* TBD [trajectories] Add PiecewisePose::MakeLinear ([#15803][_#15803])  # Helper method when the goal is to have a first-order position trajectory.
* TBD [manipulation] In show_model only read the top-level package_path ([#15801][_#15801])  # When given a directory with a package.xml file to load, read only that one file; do not crawl through all of its subfolders recursively trying to find other xml files lying around to read in. Going back through git history and code reviews, this seems to have always been the design intent, but somehow was botched from the get-go. Crawling through all folders leads to problems when loading runfiles/anzu/package.xml also tries to load runfiles/anzu/external/drake/package.xml and its friends.
* TBD Add alias LinearSolver, rename LinearSolve ([#15790][_#15790])  # This new alias simplifies the return type from GetLinearSolver. Also, deprecate the old function name LinearSolve, in favor of SolveLinearSystem, which better fits the style guide naming advice.
* TBD [math,common] Provide GSG-compatible signatures for autodiff utilities ([#15699][_#15699])  # .
* TBD [lcmtypes] Update lcmt_panda_command ([#15784][_#15784])  # Allow (and require) more clarity around which fields are required vs ignored.
* TBD Narrow Apple clang fixup by version ([#15839][_#15839])  # Relevant to: #15802 Prior versions of apple clang leaked an inline namespace token into names; version 13 no longer needs a fixup for it.
* TBD Add LinearSolver class ([#15818][_#15818])  # Also move the previous alias LinearSolver to internal::EigenLinearSolver
* TBD [common,geometry] [pydrake] Fix ODR violations in get_new_id bindings ([#15857][_#15857])  # This partially reverts commit 613a1858b6be6c415d5141c1a1d3d5262fcd1cbe. Co-authored-by: Sean Curtis <sean.curtis@tri.global>
* TBD [math,tutorials] Deprecate old names for autodiff utilities ([#15875][_#15875])
* TBD [math,multibody,examples] Replace LDLT in multibody plant with math::LinearSolver ([#15874][_#15874])  # The math::LinearSolver is a lot faster than templated Eigen solver when the scalar type is AutoDiffScalar. Add a default constructor for LinearSolver class. Change the return type of LinearSolver::Solve(). If both A and b contain the same scalar type (either double or symbolic::Expression), then the return type is Eigen::Solve<>, the same return type as decomposition.solve().
* TBD [common] SortedPair is consistent with the wrapper type's operators ([#15907][_#15907])  # Instead of insisting that the wrapped type is default constructible, copy constructible, copy assignable, move constructible, and move assignable, just let the compiler do its thing.
* TBD [common,geometry] [geometry] Bvh uses default copy/move/assign operations ([#15906][_#15906])  # Fix copyable_unique_ptr to be usable on a forward-declared type, ala unique_ptr.  We can't put static_assert on T at class scope.
* TBD [planner] Deprecate uses of Eigen::Isometry3 ([#15909][_#15909])
* TBD implement missing derivative overrides in bspline ([#15895][_#15895])
* TBD [common,tools] [common] DRAKE_DEFAULT_COPY_AND_MOVE_AND_ASSIGN detects mis-uses ([#15884][_#15884])  # Add unit test advice to complement the new built-in checking. This commit also contains a demonstration of related changes: * Add (positive) unit test for this macro. * Fix name_value to correctly document its (pre-existing) non-copyable behavior. * Remove useless unit test for a defaulted copy constructor.
* TBD

## pydrake bindings

<!-- <relnotes for bindings go here> -->

* TBD [pydrake:math] Add bindings for RigidTransform comparison methods ([#15785][_#15785])
* TBD [primitives] Add python binding for `Integrator<T>::set_integral_value` ([#15794][_#15794])  # * [primitives] Add python binding for Integrator<T>::set_integral_value
* TBD py deprecation: Expose `deprecated_callable` as decorator ([#15877][_#15877])  # Add example

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

Newly bound

* TBD

## Build system

<!-- <relnotes for cmake,doc,setup,third_party,tools go here> -->

* TBD [setup] Added a -y flag which installs with apt-get install -y ([#15819][_#15819])  # Co-authored-by: Thomas Wood <thomas.wood@lifebio.com> Co-authored-by: Jeremy Nimmer <jeremy.nimmer@tri.global>
* TBD [workspace] Upgrade rules_python to latest release 0.4.0 ([#15870][_#15870])
* TBD [workspace] Upgrade buildifier to latest release 4.2.0 ([#15880][_#15880])
* TBD [workspace] Upgrade bazel_skylib to latest release 1.1.1 ([#15885][_#15885])
* TBD [workspace] Upgrade fcl to latest commit ([#15885][_#15885])  # This commit coincides with the release tag 0.7.0.
* TBD [workspace] Upgrade googlebenchmark to latest release v1.6.0 ([#15885][_#15885])
* TBD [workspace] Upgrade ignition_math to latest release 6.9.1 ([#15885][_#15885])
* TBD [workspace] Upgrade ros_xacro to latest release 1.13.14 ([#15885][_#15885])
* TBD [workspace] Upgrade usockets to latest release v0.8.1 ([#15885][_#15885])
* TBD [workspace] Upgrade uwebsockets to latest release v20.5.0 ([#15885][_#15885])
* TBD [workspace] Upgrade meshcat and meshcat_python to latest commit ([#15898][_#15898])  # Add install rule for meshcat webpack license notice that is newly available as of this commit. In Bazel files always use kwargs (not positional args) so that tools/workspace/new_release can perform automatic upgrades.
* TBD

## Build dependencies

<!-- Manually relocate any "Upgrade foo_external to latest" lines to here, -->
<!-- and then sort them alphabetically. -->

* TBD

## Newly-deprecated APIs

* TBD

## Removal of deprecated items

* TBD

# Notes


This release provides [pre-compiled binaries](https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/releases/tag/v0.35.0) named
``drake-YYYYMMDD-{bionic|focal|mac}.tar.gz``. See [Nightly Releases](/from_binary.html#nightly-releases) for instructions on how to use them.

Drake binary releases incorporate a pre-compiled version of [SNOPT](https://ccom.ucsd.edu/~optimizers/solvers/snopt/) as part of the
[Mathematical Program toolbox](https://drake.mit.edu/doxygen_cxx/group__solvers.html). Thanks to
Philip E. Gill and Elizabeth Wong for their kind support.

<!-- <begin issue links> -->
[_#15571]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15571
[_#15699]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15699
[_#15731]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15731
[_#15772]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15772
[_#15773]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15773
[_#15778]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15778
[_#15783]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15783
[_#15784]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15784
[_#15785]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15785
[_#15786]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15786
[_#15787]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15787
[_#15788]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15788
[_#15790]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15790
[_#15792]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15792
[_#15793]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15793
[_#15794]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15794
[_#15795]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15795
[_#15799]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15799
[_#15801]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15801
[_#15803]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15803
[_#15812]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15812
[_#15814]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15814
[_#15817]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15817
[_#15818]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15818
[_#15819]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15819
[_#15823]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15823
[_#15826]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15826
[_#15834]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15834
[_#15838]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15838
[_#15839]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15839
[_#15840]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15840
[_#15841]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15841
[_#15847]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15847
[_#15848]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15848
[_#15849]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15849
[_#15850]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15850
[_#15851]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15851
[_#15852]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15852
[_#15857]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15857
[_#15862]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15862
[_#15863]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15863
[_#15870]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15870
[_#15874]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15874
[_#15875]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15875
[_#15876]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15876
[_#15877]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15877
[_#15880]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15880
[_#15884]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15884
[_#15885]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15885
[_#15886]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15886
[_#15895]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15895
[_#15898]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15898
[_#15900]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15900
[_#15903]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15903
[_#15906]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15906
[_#15907]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15907
[_#15909]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15909
[_#15912]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/15912
<!-- <end issue links> -->

<!--
  Current oldest_commit b7ccd7e34dc0003d05067b86d610c8f8e310f7c7 (exclusive).
  Current newest_commit c11528df17b64d8657f47d596cd8b55e94f25732 (inclusive).
-->
